---
title: "2019 in Review"
date: 2019-12-31T09:22:56+01:00
---

The year is coming to an end and I guess it's time to take a look at what one
has accomplished in the past 365 days.

I had two main goals this year: do more side projects and blog more. My plan
was to do at least a project per month and as soon as it's in a "reasonably"
complete state write a post about it.

So let's see what projects I made during this year.

## [Chip8 emulator](https://github.com/danieledapo/chip8)

This was the first project of the year and I think it was one of funniest. It's
a simple [chip8](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CHIP-8) emulator capable of
running simple games like PONG.

It was a ton of fun because I learned a bit more about how emulators work and I
got to play with WebAssembly and Rust. Under a non technology point of view,
this project was interesting because I realized that even if I had the core of
the project done in a couple of days, I spent a lot more time polishing things
like making the web ui nicer. A project is not only the core algorithm I guess.

Anyway, you can find the emulator at <https://danieledapo.github.io/chip8> and a
blog post [here](/post/chip8-emulator-rs).

![chip8-screenshot](chip8-screenshot.png)

## [Sudoku solver](https://github.com/danieledapo/sudoku-rs)

I like Sudoku, it's a fun game that I usually play when I'm bored at the
airport, but still. I decided to write a solver (and generator) for it.

I thought it was a hard problem given the quite big search space, but it turns
out that you can prune the search space aggressively by just following the
rules. It didn't took me very long to come up with a reasonably fast solver and
then a generator. I also implemented a couple (probably unneeded) optimizations
because bit twiddling is always a fun thing to do.

![sudoku-screenshot](sudoku-screenshot.png)

## [JV](https://github.com/danieledapo/jv)

I don't know if this was a fun project, but sure enough it was frustrating.
It's a "simple" json viewer that allows to use
[jq](https://stedolan.github.io/jq/)-like queries to search for elements in a
JSON document. It also supports automatic jumping to the path under the cursor
if it's a valid query. Incidentally this also works as a simple file viewer.

The part that was annoying was text rendering, in particular handling the width
of a character. I thought that as long as we stick with ASCII (I'm sorry, but
handling the width of unicode codepoints is really a pain) it should always be
one. Then the tab '\t' character came along and I started crying...

Anyway, I'm proud to say that tab characters are properly handled by JV and
that it proved useful a bunch of times.

If you really want to know more about my frustrutations then I wrote a
[post](/post/jv) for you.

![jv-screenshot](jv-screenshot.png)

## [Buzz](https://github.com/danieledapo/r3d)

This was the hardest, but most satisfying project among all the other projects
I've done this year. It's a toy ray tracer that I wrote to learn more about the
topic and about rendering in general.

It was a blast, I learned a bunch of things and I realized the effort it goes
into making a scene look good. Even more so if it's just a frame of an
animation!

This was my entry point to the world of computer graphics which is something I
realized I like playing with from time to time.

Since this was a big project I definitely wanted to write a post and
[there](/post/buzz) you have it!

![buzz-csg](/post/buzz/csg.png)

## [Diffusion limited aggregation](https://github.com/danieledapo/dla)

As soon as Buzz got into a "working" state I wanted to use it to render some
cool looking scenes and [diffusion limited
aggregation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffusion-limited_aggregation)
seemed like a cool thing to try.

DLA is a process that simulates Brownian motion which results in dendric and
snowflaky shapes. I think it can be done in any number of dimensions but at
least in 2D and 3D the resulting patterns are quite interesting.

I intended to write a blog post about this because I particularly enjoyed
working on this project, but for whatever reason I did not. Maybe in the
future.

<img src="/post/2019-in-review/dla-small.png" alt="dla-small" class="image-centered">

## [Isolines - marching squares](https://github.com/danieledapo/marching-squares-rs)

At this point, I needed a break from Buzz because it's best not to overdo and I
decided to play around with isolines. I've always been fascinated by
topographic maps. I'm not sure why, I guess I like lines.

Anyway, I decided to implement the [marching square
algorithm](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marching_squares) that allows to find
the paths in an image at a given "height" (technically speaking above a given
threshold, but meh...). If we simply use it to find the paths at different
heights then we have a simple topographic map!

I like the topographic maps I'm able to generate starting from an heightmap and
I'm thinking about printing (or even pen plotting) some just for fun.

I think this was worth a blog post, but I was lazy and didn't write any.

![italy.png](italy.png)

## [Terrain mesh generation](https://github.com/danieledapo/terrain-mesh)

On the same note as the previous project, I started wondering if I could
generate a 3D mesh resembling a mountain or terrain. It turned out to be quite
easy once I found out about [Perlin
noise](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Perlin_noise). I spent more time writing
the code that actually connects the mesh than tuning the terrain generation
parameters.

The best thing about this project is that eventually I was able to 3d print
some of the generated meshes!

I wrote a [post](/post/terrain-mesh-from-noise) about this, yay!

![random-terrain](/post/terrain-mesh/terrain.png)

## [Delaunay mesh](https://github.com/danieledapo/delaunay-mesh)

This was more of an experiment than an actual project since I was mostly
playing around with triangulation with no clear goal in mind. You won't find
anything too interesting here, it's just an (inefficient) implementation of a
triangulation algorithm.

![delaunay](delaunay.png)

## [Morse CLI](https://github.com/danieledapo/morse)

This was a funny one, not particularly challenging but it was nice nonetheless.
It's a very simple CLI that allows to encode and decode ASCII text in [Morse
code](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morse_code). I also implemented a very
simple play feature that allows to actually hear what Morse sounds like.

![morse](morse-screenshot.png)

## [Four-Color maps](https://github.com/danieledapo/4color-map)

This was the last project of the year, it's an absolutely non mathematical
proof that the [Four-Color
theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Four_color_theorem) holds. The theorem
says that any given planar map can be colored using at most four colors and
what's the best way to test it than actually generating some maps and trying to
color them? That's exactly what I did.

Ironically, the hardest part of the project was not finding whether a map (or
graph) could be colored with at most four colors, but instead generating a good
looking random map. I implemented a voronoi like map generation which works
reasonably well, but I think there are better ways.

Also, this made me realize that I like maps more than I thought.

![4color-map](4color-map.svg)

## Conclusions

If I'm ok with the amount and kind of projects I managed to do, I'm definitely
not with the amount of posts I've written as I've written only five. There are
some projects that I think are worth a post either because they're interesting
or because I put a lot of effort in them, but I was too lazy or tired to
actually write it.

My resolutions for 2020 are basically the same that is a project per month and
blog post about it except that this time I want to be more strict on the latter.

Happy new year!
