---
title: "Ivo, the isometric voxel renderer!"
date: 2022-08-17T11:48:09+02:00
---


It's been a long time since my last post, but I didn't stop doing things. This
time I want to talk about [ivo][ivo-github], my isometric voxel renderer.

I've always been inspired by [@wblut][wblut]'s work, it's a great combination
between coding skills and art. In particular, his isometric pieces are
absolutely stunning, intricate and coherent at the same time. Just check his
twitter profile to have an idea of the complexity of his work!

I decided to try and come up with a similar system mainly to understand how it
worked. Also, since I recently got a pen plotter (yay!) I wanted the system to
produce pen-plotter friendly SVGs.


## The system

The system at its core is just a collection of voxels that can be turned on and
off programmatically, perform hidden line removal and ultimately save the set of
visible lines onto the SVG. Since I'm using the system mostly to plot the SVGs
I'm not interested in doing some cool shading and fills, I just wanted the
visible outlines of the voxels.

I could have tried to use some framework of some sort because voxel renderers
are quite common and useful, but I didn't find one capable of doing hidden line
removal and outputting SVGs. Hence, I decided to build everything from scratch.
At the end of the day, how hard can it be to take a set of voxels, project them
always in the same way and understand which lines are visible and which are not,
right?

Turns out it took me quite some time, more that I'd like to admit. This is the
main reason I'm writing this post, maybe someone someday will find this useful
and hopefully avoid a lot of frustration.


## The madness of hidden line removal

The first thing to notice is that with an isometric projection only three faces
can be visible. This simplifies things a bit because the renderer has to keep
track of those three faces only and can cut corners if need be. I chose to keep
track of the front, top and right faces, but the choice is completely arbitrary.

<img src="isocube.svg" alt="isometric cube" class="image-centered">

At this point comes the hardest part of the project, that is understanding which
edges of the faces are visible and which are not because if two (or more) voxels
are adjacent then some edges may be invisible. Here are a couple of examples
where the dashed edges are actually invisible and must be hidden.

<img src="adjacent.svg" alt="some voxels examples" class="image-centered">

At the time, this didn't feel like a huge problem. I was dead wrong. I got stuck
on this for weeks and lost the few bits of sanity left in me. My initial
approach was to draw an edge of a face if it wasn't shared by any other voxel.
This seemed pretty reasonable to me, but there were a lot of subtle details that
make this approach quite annoying to implement.

First of all, it's actually not true that if an edge is shared between voxels
it's invisible! Here's an example of this case

<img src="shared_edge.svg" alt="edge that should be visible between two voxels"
class="image-centered">

Here the edge in red is shared between the two voxels, but it's not invisible at
all!

But okay, here the problem is that the voxels are not adjacent (e.g. they do not
touch), just make sure that at least two voxels are adjacent before hiding an
edge, right? That works, but unfortunately that's not the only problem with this
approach.

Consider the following scenario

<img src="shared_edge_invisible.svg" alt="edge that should be invisible between
two voxels" class="image-centered">

Should the red edge be visible or not? Well, clearly it should be invisible
since it's shared between two adjacent voxels. However, with the current
approach it's considered visible. Why? Because it's shared between the right
face of a voxel and the _left_ face of the other, but left faces are not tracked
by the system and the edge is seen as shared by only one voxel, hence visible!

This was really frustrating to me because it means that I had to still keep
track of the invisible faces only to check if an edge is visible or not. I was
starting to think that there must have been a better approach to all of this,
but I implemented the changes anyway just to see where this was going.

And it was at this point that I hit the wall that led me to rewrite all of this
insanity. Consider the following example

<img src="death.svg" alt="voxel death combo" class="image-centered">

See how the front and right faces of the voxel in the back get clipped into
triangles given that there's a voxel in front of them? Well, I didn't even think
about that because I was so frustrated and annoyed. At this point I didn't
really want to touch that pile of messy code anymore and I started think about a
more elegant solution.

Luckily, I was able to find a good enough solution. The idea is to triangulate
each visible face into two triangles with the edge shared between the triangles
marked as invisible.

<img src="triangulation.svg" alt="voxel triangulation" class="image-centered">

Using triangles makes the clipping problem quite easy to solve because a
triangle is not occluded and the other one is, no need to clip anything!

Also, determining whether an edge is invisible or not is not more difficult than
doing so with the quadrilateral faces and I'd argue it's even simpler because
less cases have to be considered for a triangle.

It took me some time to write down all the visibility rules, but it was not
difficult, just tedious work. Eventually though it worked almost from the
get-go! Saying I was ecstatic would be an understatement.


## Render order

Okay, now that the edge visibility problem has been solved it's time to start
rendering these edges.

The approach I took is to render each voxel from closest to farthest making sure
no triangles in the isometric space are drawn twice. Note that the state of the
edges doesn't matter because if the triangle was already drawn it means there's
a voxel that's closer to the eye that hides whatever edges are in the farthest
voxel.

To do so there should be a "nearness" value for each voxel that's bigger when
the voxel is closer to the eye. I'm quite sure there are quite a few different
approaches and formulas here, the one I went with is

```rust
pub fn nearness((x, y, z): Voxel) -> i64 {
    x + y + z
}
```

Another way to think about this function is simply the distance between the
origin and the voxel, the bigger the distance the closer the voxel. Note that
there's no need to do the correct calculation, but the Manhattan distance can be
used instead because voxels with the same nearness value end up being in
different positions in the isometric space.


## 3D to 2D projection

Finally, the last bit I had to figure out is how to project the 3D points into
the 2D isometric plane.

The way I do it is to first project the 3D point into a regular 2D orthogonal
space by removing the z component. At this point, the point in the 2D orthogonal
plane must be projected into the final isometric space. This space is actually
just a grid of hexagons which means it's made by two axis at 30Â°. Hence, the
orthogonal coordinates just have to "follow" these new axes.

<img src="projection.svg" alt="isometric projection" class="image-centered">

Here's the projection code in Rust

```rust
fn project((x, y, z): Voxel) -> (f64,f64) {
    // i and j are the coordinates in an orthogonal plane
    let i = f64::from(x - z);
    let j = f64::from(y - z);

    // transform the orthogonal plane into the isometric one
    let (dy, dx) =  f64::sin_cos(f64::to_radians(30.0));
    (i * dx - j * dx, i * dy + j * dy)
}
```


## Conclusions

I had a lot of fun working on this project and I'm quite proud of it even though
it was really frustrating from times to times. Especially at the beginning when
I wasn't sure if what I was looking at was correct or just optical illusions.

Anyway, here are some images from various sketches that use this framework.
Until next time.

<img src="archi.png" alt="isometric architecture" class="image-centered">
<img src="octa.png" alt="octahedron" class="image-centered">

[ivo-github]: https://github.com/d-dorazio/r3d/#ivo-the-isometric-voxel-renderer
[wblut]: https://twitter.com/wblut?s=20&t=9dSF2Smqs3FbaDf0J9GgGQ
